[documentation] - Add detailed triaging process (#40805)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib: issue-triaging.md

- Guiding any interested parties to another person or resource that may be more knowledgeable about an issue.
- Suggesting an issue for discussion at a SIG meeting if a synchronous discussion would be more productive.

It is recommended that a triager should follow these steps when a new issue is reported:

> 1. First and foremost step is to access the validity of the issue. Here's an rough outline to access the validity:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Assess the validity of the issue. Here's an rough outline on how to assess:
```
Since this is numbered step 1, I think `First and foremost` isn't necessary.

> 1. First and foremost step is to access the validity of the issue. Here's an rough outline to access the validity:

Reviewer: This step is pretty focused on bugs (`description of the problem`, `expected behavior`), should we generalize a bit more, or just add more information for other types of issues?

   - Does the issue include a clear description of the problem?

>    - Does it provide the user’s configuration, the expected behavior, and any other relevant context?

Reviewer: We should probably call out Collector version being used here too. It's very difficult to make progress triaging without knowing the version.

   - If it's reported as a bug, are the steps to reproduce clearly outlined?

2. If the issue is deemed valid and requires attention, apply appropriate labels based on its nature:
   - For bugs, add the `bug` label along with `waiting-for-codeowners`.
   - For enhancements, use the `enhancement` label and also add `waiting-for-codeowners`.

>    - If the issue is about a new component, add the `sponsor-needed` label. We should encourage user to join our SIG and propose the new component. They can also reach out on #otel-collector on CNCF slack.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - If the issue is about a new component, add the `sponsor-needed` label. We should encourage the user to join our SIG meeting and propose the new component to a broader audience. They can also reach out in the #otel-collector-dev channel on CNCF Slack.
```
Nits: Adjusted the wording as filing an issue for a new component is the same as "propose the new component". Bringing it up in the sig meeting is to make a wider audience aware of the proposal in hopes of more feedback, interest, and finding a sponsor.

Also, I could go either way on `#otel-collector` vs `#otel-collector-dev`.

   - Check out [state diagram](#state-diagram) for detailed information about all labels.

3. An issue may be considered invalid for the following reasons:
   - The user is using an incorrect configuration.

>    - The bug/enhancement has already been addressed in the newer version.

Reviewer: This is a nit, feel free to drop, but if a bug or enhancement has already been addressed in a newer version, I'd say that the issue status is completed, not invalid.

Author: Makes sense. I've added a new step that talks about closing an issue if it's completed.

   - The issue was filed in the wrong repository:

>        - For example, we might receive an issue for `otlpexporter` in contrib. You should transfer the issue to the `opentelemetry-collector` repository.

Reviewer: We should probably add guidance on how to transfer the issue. I prefer asking project maintainers on CNCF Slack rather than the issue, to avoid noise and confusion for the person who filed the issue, but happy to hear if someone has a different preference.

>        - Same goes for other related repository such as `opentelemetry-operator`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
I don't think this example provided any extra value over the first example.

> 4. Ocassionally, an issue might lack sufficient information to proceed. In such cases, ask the author clarifying questions, focusing on:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Occasionally, an issue might lack sufficient information to proceed. In such cases, ask the author clarifying questions, focusing on:
```

> 4. Ocassionally, an issue might lack sufficient information to proceed. In such cases, ask the author clarifying questions, focusing on:

Reviewer: This step seems to be very connected to step 1, assessing the validity of an issue. Could we merge them into a single step here?

   - Collector configuration (missing or incomplete configurations not uncommon)
   - The expected vs. actual behavior
   - Clear and complete steps to reproduce the issue
   - Any other questions that might fit

#### Triage process flowchart 

```mermaid
flowchart TD
      Start{Check validity}
      

>       Start -->|Unclear| WaitingAuthor[Tag:<br><code>waiting-for:author</code><br>Ask for config, repro steps,<br>expected vs actual result]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      Start -->|Unclear| WaitingAuthor[Tag:<br><code>waiting for author</code><br>Ask for config, repro steps,<br>expected vs actual result]
```

      Start -->|Invalid| Transfer[Close or<br>transfer issue:<br>wrong repo, bad config,<br>already fixed etc.]
      Start --> |Valid| Classify

>       Classify -->|<code>documentation</code>| WaitingCodeowners[Tag:<br><code>waiting-for:codeowners</code>]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      Classify -->|<code>documentation</code>| WaitingCodeowners[Tag:<br><code>waiting-for-code-owners</code>]
```

      Classify -->|<code>enhancement</code>| WaitingCodeowners
      Classify -->|<code>bug</code>| EnrichBug[Tag:<br><code>bug</code>, <code>bug:perf/crash</code>,<br><code>workaround:yes/no</code>,<br><code>release:blocker</code>]

      EnrichBug --> WaitingCodeowners

>       Classify -->|New component| NewComponent[Suggest joining SIG,<br>propose via SIG,<br>or reach out on<br><code>#otel-collector-dev</code> Slack]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      Classify -->|New component| NewComponent[Tag:<br><code>sponsor-needed</code><br>Suggest joining SIG,<br>propose via SIG,<br>or reach out on<br><code>#otel-collector-dev</code> Slack]
```

- Guiding any interested parties to another person or resource that may be more knowledgeable about an issue.
- Suggesting an issue for discussion at a SIG meeting if a synchronous discussion would be more productive.

It is recommended that a triager should follow these steps when a new issue is reported:

> 1. Assess the validity of the issue. Here's an rough outline on how to assess:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Assess the validity of the issue. Here's a rough outline on how to assess:
```

- Guiding any interested parties to another person or resource that may be more knowledgeable about an issue.
- Suggesting an issue for discussion at a SIG meeting if a synchronous discussion would be more productive.

It is recommended that a triager should follow these steps when a new issue is reported:

1. Assess the validity of the issue. Here's an rough outline on how to assess:
   - Does the issue include a clear description of the problem?
      - Whether it’s a bug report, an enhancement proposal, or a request for a new component, the purpose of the issue should be easy to understand.

>    - Following outline is applicable to bugs or enhancements:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - The following outline is applicable to bugs or enhancements:
```

      - Does the issue specify the relevant version or environment details?
      - Does it provide the user’s configuration, the expected behavior, and any other relevant context?
      - If it's reported as a bug, are the steps to reproduce clearly outlined?
      - For enhancements, does the user clearly outline the expected behavior and provide relevant examples or use cases?

>    - For new components requests:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - For new component requests:
```

      - Collector configuration (missing or incomplete configurations are not uncommon)
      - The expected vs. actual behavior
      - Clear and complete steps to reproduce the issue
      - Collector version
      - Any other questions that might fit

2. If the issue is deemed valid and requires attention, apply appropriate labels based on its nature:
   - For bugs, add the `bug` label along with `waiting-for-codeowners`.
   - For enhancements, use the `enhancement` label and also add `waiting-for-codeowners`.
   - If the issue is about a new component, add the `sponsor-needed` label. We should encourage the user to join our SIG meeting and propose the new component to a broader audience. They can also reach out in the #otel-collector-dev channel on CNCF Slack.
   - Check out [state diagram](#state-diagram) for detailed information about all labels.

3. An issue may be considered invalid for the following reasons:
   - The user is using an incorrect configuration.
       - In such cases, a brief comment and a link to documentation should be sufficient to close the issue.
   - The issue was filed in the wrong repository:

>        - For example, we might receive an issue for `otlpexporter` in contrib. It is best to reach out to project maintainers on CNCF slack and ask to transfer the issue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       - For example, we might receive an issue for `otlpexporter` in contrib. It is best to reach out in the #otel-collector-dev channel on CNCF Slack and ask project maintainers to transfer the issue.
```

4. An issue may be considered complete for following reasons:
   - The enhancement/bugfix PR has been merged.
   - The enhancement/bugfix has already been addressed in the newer version.
   - The new component has been added to the repository.

> 5. _For new components_:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. For new components:
```
I don't believe this should be in italics, but let me know if I've missed something.

> 5. _For new components_:

Reviewer: What's the benefit of having this as its own section, vs. adding this information to the `Assess the validity` step? This section is simply providing more prompts for triagers when a new component is proposed, and these questions are in the same box in the flowchart below, so I think it makes sense to include as initial questions. What do you think?

>    - We should set clear expectations reagarding a new component, if it is accepted:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - We should set clear expectations regarding a new component, if it is accepted:
```

      - Will the user contribute the necessary code, or they are expecting someone from upstream to volunteer?
      - Will the user be available to provide feedback, clarify requirements, or help with testing and maintenance?

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

#### Triage process flowchart 

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    Start{Check validity}

    Start -->|Unclear| WaitingAuthor[Tag:<br><code>waiting-for-author</code><br>Ask for config, repro steps,<br>expected vs actual result]
    Start -->|Invalid| Transfer[Close or<br>transfer issue:<br>wrong repo, bad config, etc.]
    Start -->|Valid| Classify

    Classify -->|Bug| EnrichBug[Tag:<br><code>bug</code>,<br><code>waiting-for-codeowners</code>,<br>Optional: <code>bug:perf/crash</code>,<br><code>workaround:yes/no</code>,<br><code>release:blocker</code>]

>     EnrichBug --> WaitingCodeowners[Tag:<br><code>waiting-for-codeowners</code>]

Reviewer: What's the value of having a whole box dedicated to `Tag: waiting-for-codeowners`, when each of the boxes pointing to it also say to apply the `waiting-for-codeowners` label? I'd suggest we either remove the label from the separate boxes and have a single step for apply the tag in each case, or have each case apply the tag and remove the extra individual step.
